I'll ask the questions.
So can you please just tell us your name and where and when you were born?
My name is Jabeen. I'm born in Kampala, Uganda. That's in East Africa.
I came here in 1972 as a refugee.
Are you okay to say that in Swahili?
Yes. Swahili I can't remember all of it. I'll speak in our own language.
My name is Jabeen. I'm born in Uganda, East Africa.
I've been a refugee for 50 years.
When did you say you were born as well?
I was born on the 15th of September 1958.
First section we're just going to talk about growing up outside of the UK.
What do you remember about the area that you grew up in?
When I was in Uganda, we came here in 1972. I used to be about 8 years old.
We used to go to school there. The schooling was different from here because we were more in primary schools.
So when we came here they put us in secondary school so that was a very big step.
Mostly we just went to school there and we had to pay fees.
We used to celebrate independence there, all the events because all the different people,
Muslims, Hindus, Christians, we all used to go to the same school.
So if it's Christmas we go to the church and then when it's Diwali we go to the Hindu temple.
But Muslims we used to go to the mosque and then we had all African children as well with us.
So all nationalities were together and we all grew up together.
The English was the main language there and then you could speak Swahili.
That's the Ugandan and there's a Ugandan language as well.
There were many different languages but the main was English.
So when I came here it was a bit easier for us.
Because you learnt how to speak English.
Yes, English was probably there.
So what was it like growing up in the house?
We were like a big family living in a small house and we had grandparents and all that.
So we used to go and visit them.
Then we used to, like weekends we used to go to the lake side, have a picnic.
It was nice to go to the neighbour's house, mingle with them, with their festival and all that.
So it was completely different when we came here.
We used to go to the markets, local markets.
What did you kind of love the most or enjoy the most about Krona?
Growing up there the weather was nice.
We very hardly had the rain.
In East Africa the weather was always nice.
A lot of greenery.
We used to go for long walks in the riverside.
It was so safe, you know.
You didn't hear anything.
In the end somebody kidnapped you or abused you or nothing like that.
Everything was safe.
You could walk miles and miles in the jungle and nobody bothered you.
The people were very friendly.
What did you think about your childhood?
I didn't have much childhood because we went that well off.
We were just taking easy days to come.
So it was just a simple life, but no stress.
We just wake up in the morning, go to school half day, come home, eat and just play outside.
No computers, no television, nothing like that.
Just people mingling together.
What type of games did you play?
We used to play hip hop.
We used to have chalk and just play on the ground.
And just climb trees picking mangoes.
And just had a few toys, not much toys like we do here.
Just had a few old fashioned toys.
We had our grandparents get them for us.
My mum used to cook. We didn't have cookers or anything.
We used to just help around.
If you do the house chores, my mum used to give us money to buy sweets.
So everything we had to earn.
And hip hop, was that with the squares?
Yes, squares.
And then you would throw?
Yes, throw.
And then skipping rope we used to use and skip.
That was just our way of, you know, because the weather was always dry.
And we just looked forward to that.
All the children get together from the neighbourhoods.
And we just played that.
So then travelling, I was just making sure hip hop because it was the same.
Growing up in Zimbabwe, so I was exactly the same.
I was trying to remember whether we did throw the stone and then we would go.
And have hope.
So travelling to the UK, what made you decide to come to the UK?
In 1972, the president of Uganda gave all white people, Jews, Asians, all mixed race people,
to leave the country within 90 days.
So all we were allowed to do is, if you have a British passport, you can come to Britain.
So in 1947, 1960, the British used to rule everything.
And then they decided, who wants to become British citizens?
Or you can have African status.
So my mum decided to be British, take British passport.
And my dad was Ugandan.
So then he had a problem coming.
So anybody with a British passport, you have to leave.
They came and started breaking the house and kidnapping people.
Very, very rough, like a ritual regime.
And then we were all six brothers and sisters.
So all of us came with my mum.
So we had to catch a flight from there.
We didn't have ticket money or anything.
So then we had to go to the church, temples, Guru Dwaray, and get money for the tickets to come here.
All we were allowed was 20 shillings, that's about two pounds.
And one suitcase each.
And we were little, so we didn't know what was happening.
So we went to the airport and waited for the flight and they brought us to Heathrow.
Because we were little, we didn't understand much.
But I remember what used to happen there, you know.
It was getting really bad.
And then from the airport, they brought us to Heathrow.
So in Heathrow, we had the National Front and them.
They said they were not coming here, there were 90,000 Asians.
Because all the Jews went to Israel and all different nationalities.
So you had a choice.
If you are not educated, a professional doctor or anybody, you can go to Canada or America.
But if you have more children and you are not educated or anything,
they send you to Mexico, Peru, or Britain had to take us.
Because my mum had a passport and we were all underage.
When we came here, it was difficult.
But they moved us, they put us in a camp.
The camp is where the army stays, not like camps.
Big camp.
They took us to London, Kensington, stayed there a few days.
They showed us all the London.
We had a nice VIP treatment.
But then they didn't want anybody there because there were too many Asians already there.
All foreign people.
So they moved us to Kensington in Warwick.
And there we stayed like a month.
And then they moved us to North Wales, Stowin.
There was a big seaside with all the camps, army camps, big warehouses.
So we stayed there about three months.
And then they said, right, we have to move you around.
So they sent us to Wales, Pontypridd.
And a lot of Asians didn't want to come to Wales.
They wanted to go to big cities like Nottingham, Leicester, London.
But the council said, no, no more Asians here because there's too many already.
Because there's all different nationalities.
We didn't like the way the first people.
So to rehouse 80,000 people, 100,000 people was a big job.
So they gave us a council house.
They made sure they sent us to school.
They gave us all the food, furniture, everything in the house.
New, brand new council house.
So they looked after us, you know.
But then when we were in the camp, everybody was together.
So when we went, it was a bit lonely.
Because when we went to the school, we went to Pontypridd.
We were the only Asians there.
Me, my sister, and my cousin.
So because the two families, they sent there.
My uncle and his wife and his kids.
My dad wasn't here.
He was in Italy because he was a state place.
Red Cross took them to Italy, Naples.
So he stayed there.
And then after a while, he came and joined us.
So then we grew up, they went to school there.
Like I said, the education was a bit hard.
Because we come from primary school going to high school.
So we only lived there for two, three years.
And then they said, what do you want to do?
I wanted to be a nurse, but I didn't have any qualifications.
And then I just got a job in a supermarket.
And my sister and everybody.
And we lived there for five years.
And then we couldn't get any Asian food or anything.
You know, halal meat or anything.
So we moved.
We used to go from Pontypridd to Cardiff to do shopping.
We used to go to the cinemas there.
And we were just teenagers.
And then my dad said, it's not good staying here now.
Because you know, like growing up, there's no mosque.
Or there's no place where you can go meet somebody from your country.
So then they moved us.
My dad and mom moved to Cambridge, you know, Peterborough.
And we went there as well.
But then after when I got married, I came to Newport.
I stayed in Newport.
And I've been in Newport for the last 35 years.
Yes.
I worked in the hospital and moved around, you know.
So at the moment I'm a carer.
I had to leave my job in the NHS because I had medical problems.
Yes.
And when my disabled daughter was born, I had to leave everything.
So I'm a carer for now.
And we formed this Age of Life.
So when, like, there's workshops and everything in Newport.
And there's a girl called Lorraine.
She's from Caribbean.
When she went to uni, so she was doing a project on minorities,
black and Asian minorities.
So she had a little workshop.
I started talking to her.
And I said, what are you doing?
She said, I want some Asian and half Caribbean and all that.
So I can, what would you really like?
I said, it would be nice to have a swimming classes for women.
Because a lot of Asian women won't go to normal classes.
So she said, oh, do you know anybody?
I said, I asked my sister and five of us joined it.
So now it's 30.
And then Roy came after, you know, Vanessa and Roy.
And the group is now to 30, all different nationalities.
So it's been going for the last 18 years, I think 15 to 18 years.
I used to go there a lot because of medical problems.
I go now and again, you know.
So we learn a lot, you know.
We get together with all different cultures.
Windrush, that was enjoyable.
Brings memories back from home, you know.
So when you tell people I'm from Africa, you know,
they say you're not, you know, dark skin or curly hair.
My great-grandparents came from India in 1947.
And when there was a petition there, they had to move.
So my grandfather moved to Kenya and my grandmother to Uganda.
And then my dad and mom were born there.
They got married there.
They introduced you, like arranged marriages there.
And a long time ago everybody used to marry into their own,
not like now with multicultural.
So that was experience, you know.
Five times I took my younger daughter to see which I was born.
The school I showed her, but you can't go out in the night.
It's very scary.
So we went to Kenya.
I got family there.
We crossed the border into Uganda.
There's nightmare.
It's very scary in the night, you know.
And then in the border you have to, like, they stop you, you know.
How much money you got?
You know, and you're scared, you know.
And then after we went, they stayed in the hotel.
So we were there for about five days.
Then I took her to a ginger that falls.
And I told them this was my school.
They demolished it.
They got big, in them days they didn't have big shopping malls or anything.
But now, you know, they built a lot of things.
So we went there.
But you have to take somebody who's local or the security guard.
So we had to look at the mall and you can get,
we missed the food there, you know, like African food.
Matoke, that's green bananas.
And over there they make it in leaves, you know.
We had that, we had dry fish and sweet potato, cassava, yam,
and all those things we're used to.
But you can get it now in the supermarket.
But that feeling, that atmosphere is not the same, you know.
Over there people didn't have much, but you see people smiling, you know.
We're all like a big family, you know.
It's all of our schoolmates, all from Africa, you know.
And it was sad when we had to come here.
But because we have been through a lot, you know,
here everything was new.
There was a lot of isolation here.
So I've been there like 10 years, about five, six times,
because I'm a family there.
And I went to Uganda once.
After 40 years being here, to see what it was like.
Everything has changed.
The school where we went was demolished.
And the houses, they were breaking, making into big buildings.
There were a lot of Asians going from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh.
They're there now.
They've opened shops and all that.
But it's nice to just go there and wander around and see, you know, the greenery.
The people over there, they all died or passed on.
So everything was new, you know.
When you enter Uganda, the climate is so good.
And the mud there is all like red, you know.
And the greenery is better than Kenya, you know, in Tanzania.
That's what you miss, you know, the food and all that.
I love to go again, because we went to visit my grandparents' graveyard.
It was in Kalolo, you know.
And there, like, it was memories, you know.
So whoever died there couldn't come here, you know.
They were buried there.
So that was a nice lifetime experience, you know.
But now I'm too old to travel, you know.
We need a group.
They're doing group tours, you know, if you want to go there.
It costs a lot.
But there are a lot of memories.
So now it's going to be 50 years, Ugandan Asians came here.
So they have a celebration like Windrush.
So they all get together.
A lot of them passed away, you know.
So all the youngsters, they're showing films, how they came here, how they...
Everybody was, like, young, you know.
So if we meet somebody, they say, so you're from Uganda.
There's a lot of...
Most of the people are business people.
So when they came here, they opened shops and, you know, all that.
And the ones who didn't have anything, they started from nothing.
But, you know, when I went on holiday there, there's too many memories, you know.
Memories and all the army used to torture people.
So they're asking people, whoever had...
They were to leave everything there.
Whoever got houses, businesses, they can go back.
But it's, you know, like, you know, it's very hard to start again.
Because the children's grown up here.
They won't be able to live there, just...
Because over there you have to work, you know.
Yeah, when you leave your school, you have to get a job.
You're not like here, you know, gone the door.
So they're very strict, you know.
Yes.
And there was well-spoken English teachers.
So everything was in English, you know, just like here.
So that helped a lot when we moved here.
Because a lot of people, the whole generation can't speak English.
So it's very difficult for them, you know.
Yes.
So if they go like...
I find a lot of people from...
We got a lot of difference, you know, people in Pakistan, Bangladesh.
They're very different from us.
They don't mix.
They have their groups, you know, on communities.
But the ones who come from Africa, they mix with everybody.
So we're like a lost tribe.
We don't have anybody from our country in Newport.
Like you go to London or somewhere, they have fun.
You meet them all there.
But then you get used to it.
So we don't belong with the Pakistani community.
We don't belong to the Bangladeshi community.
So we just like...
You know what you call it.
So then when coming to this group, you know, meeting more and more people,
we went to Windrush.
And it was nice, you know.
They have nice people, they have nice hospitality, their food, you know,
similar to the one we had.
So that was really nice, you know.
And the whole generation, how...
What they've been through and what they've been through
was worse than what we were, you know.
Like we had 90 days to get up quickly before...
If you don't go there...
When you were young, they wanted...
They started about...
What do you call it?
You know, over there Asians don't marry black people,
black people don't marry white people, things like that.
But it's changed now.
So the president said, if you stay here, you have to get married.
Because African people, they wanted that rich, you know.
They're not that educated at that time, you know.
And they were like...
All our maidens were coming and working.
So our parents and grandparents said, you can't marry there
because they haven't got a job, they haven't got a house, you know.
How are we going to adjust?
But a lot of people stayed back, you know.
It was difficult, you know.
So it was nice to come to a new country
because we didn't see the hardship here, you know.
We didn't have racism or anything.
Only once in school, a boy called me Paki.
And I didn't know what it meant.
So my cousin said, that means, you know, they got a name, like...
Different people got different names.
And then you think, these people need to be educated.
They call you Sambu or this and that, you know.
And with them, they can't see that all people are different, you know.
So if you're brown or black, they think, you know, they call you names.
So there's only one way.
So when I was little, I said, I'm not tolerating this.
I've got a botulinity on the head.
You know, I was going to walking up to school.
I said, don't you ever call me that.
So the mom comes, she says, why did you do that?
I said, because you call me names.
But that time, you can't, you know, you could hit and get away with it.
So I got away with it.
But I haven't had any violence since, you know.
I teach my children to be independent, strong, you know.
Make sure they have education in life, you know.
And I said, I don't want you to be like...
We weren't that educated.
So when we left school, got a job, you know, that was it.
I wanted to be a nurse, but I found the exams very hard.
I couldn't do general exams for nursing.
But now I got a full-time job caring for my daughter.
She's 27, you know, I'm showing her.
So she's going to uni now.
Yeah, art.
And she said, Mom, I'm so proud of myself.
I said, keep it up.
So she's doing art, fine arts.
And she's really good.
She said, Mom, people don't understand.
I put my feelings into it.
I took her to Africa, but the wheelchair access was really bad.
You know, she stayed in the hotel, you know, because the roads are not...
But now she won't go anywhere.
She just goes to uni and back, you know.
I like to get involved in more things, you know.
I said, you're a good ambassador.
You work for Whiskey.
You've got good stories to say.
But she just doesn't want to, you know.
She said, I've done my bit.
So I try and mix her up, you know.
So the children, I took them to Africa.
I said, look, this is where Mom's born.
You know, I'd love to go there, you know.
I got a good, nice company, going to stay a few days.
Have a break, you know, because that's where history is.
You can go to Spain, you can have sun tan, you know.
But the main history is in Africa, you know.
Yes.
So what people go through, what they've been through.
So it's a lot of memories, because my sister, she...
You know, Yasmin, she came in.
She hasn't got it. She's older than me, two years.
But she didn't think, she didn't know what happened, really.
But I was more like, you know, out streetwise.
Found out everything was happening.
And then Roy was writing a book.
So he wrote some of the book, I think.
I was a little bit worried.
But he wrote some of the book, I think.
About stories.
There's a lot of projects, people come back from, you know, like refugees.
What stories they're going to tell.
So sometimes when I'm, you know, well, I come and say it.
So I thought this opportunity is nice, you know.
So there's little, like yourself, you want to ask some questions.
I'll tell you exactly, you know.
Yes.
Thank you.
You know, so I hope it'll be a little bit help, you know.
Yeah, I know.
You know, like we used to walk miles and miles and miles.
You're never scared or anything.
But here in this country you get everything.
But you have too much stress.
And you haven't got the privacy, you know.
You can't even go out in the night without being attacked, you know.
But over there people knew each other.
You don't be scared, you know.
Like, you know, over there, our friends were African.
I used to go there.
My mom used to, they boiled food on this wood, you know.
They eat cassava and that.
We just sat with them and ate, you know.
But now there's more prejudice here than there used to be then.
You know.
Because some people don't like mixing, you know.
But this group is good so everybody gets together.
Share their story, you know.
I think people who came from Africa, they have a lot to share, you know.
Like some people never got back from the airport.
They weren't allowed to fly out.
Because if it's a family, they take the husbands and the sons of them.
They kill them.
So there's a lot of women came with no husbands and children, you know.
So we're lucky we didn't experience that bit, you know.
So when we came in to start again, it's very difficult, you know.
But we met a lot of nice people, English people, Welsh people.
You know, they took everywhere, showed you Tower of London.
You will have seen it otherwise.
You know.
And I thought, oh, in England, people come to study and all that.
But these days nobody's interested, you know.
So it's good people like yourself are doing all this.
It's a good project.
And it educates our youngsters, say, look what we've been through.
And you'll be something in life.
And you'll be something in the world.
Because you'll never have a second chance, you know.
Yeah.
That's what I said, Evan.
Yeah, again, thank you for sharing because all your stories are so powerful.
Yeah.
And when you're sharing and hearing what it was like at that time of the period as well.
And why it's important to have that connection.
Yes.
And have the wisdom and the education that comes along.
And you went through actually an answer, answering the questions.
Yeah.
Fantastically in the traditions, in age alive, in moving.
Yeah, you mixed it in.
Yeah.
Moving, coming here to Newport and Pontypryd as you said as well.
And that's a village now, it's a town.
It used to be that small.
There's no Asian people there.
And you know, when they see you, they call you names.
The way some of the people in the valleys, I find more racist.
Because when you see some problems.
But Turchwood in Newport is multicultural, you know.
So you can see the people in the valleys, they're more racist.
And you can see the people in the valleys, they're more racist.
Because when you see some problems.
And you can see in Newport is multicultural, you know.
So you could talk to somebody from Pakistan or Bangladesh.
They have different story.
What we've been through.
That's really heartwarming, you know.
Yeah, so people want to know,
oh, this happened.
So now, when I went to Kenya,
it was very, very hot, about 50 degrees.
I found it so hot.
That I preferred winter here.
So when I used to work in the hospital,
I went there, I came back, I was really, really big.
I was very normal.
I was like, really chocolate brown.
And they said, oh my God, do you know Kachirat, Taniswe?
I said, we're only human.
So, you know,
a lot of English people, you have to educate them, you know.
They said, oh, you go to Hedge Barrage?
I said, no.
When we came, I found my ex-partner in university.
But what we had a big culture shock.
He was Pakistani,
and I was from Africa.
So they don't understand
cultures.
So I had to stay in.
And I had a tough life,
a tough marriage, you know.
And then I had to get out of it.
Because I said, I'm a doormat.
Either I be a doormat or just go and work, study.
And my ex-husband didn't want me to go and work.
Independent, they don't like
women to do that.
But then, slowly, you know,
I educated my kids. I said, go for it.
Go and do something.
Try and be to different events.
But this angel had done a lot for us, you know.
This was so interesting.
This year, there are more things going on for a week,
and the old people's stories.
And they have been through a lot, you know.
Ours is not that bad.
Compared to what they went through when they came to this country.
So people have more opportunities now.
And I hope that question did help.
I didn't hear you.
Thank you very much.
I'll cut this for you.